 The content covers several networking topics:

1. CDNs (Content Delivery Networks)
2. VPNs (Virtual Private Networks)
3. QoS (Quality of Service)
4. TTL (Time to Live)



## Content Delivery Networks (CDN)

One way to speed up the process of getting access to data is through a CDN, which stands for Content Delivery Network. As the name implies, it is designed to provide a way to get data efficiently from a central point to an end user.

CDNs are set up in different geographical areas. There might be a CDN server in North America, South America, Africa, Asia, and other parts of the world. This allows each regional server to cache information locally.

It takes time to send data from one part of the world to another. If all North American users access a North American CDN server, it is much faster than having them all connect to a centralized server located in Europe. If you are watching this video on YouTube or any major website, you are using a CDN right now. It allows small and large sites to distribute their data to users all over the world while ensuring that data is accessible and delivered efficiently.

---

## Virtual Private Networks (VPN)

If you work outside of your corporate office or do a lot of work from home, you are probably already familiar with a VPN, which stands for Virtual Private Network. This allows you to connect to a remote network while sending all data encrypted across the connection. It is a very secure way to transfer data even across networks that would be inherently insecure, such as the public internet.

VPNs often use a device called a concentrator or head-end device to serve as the central connection point for all users accessing the VPN. This is often a purpose-built appliance designed to perform high-speed encryption and decryption of network data in real time. This allows many people to send secure data across the network, have it decrypted on the inside of the network, and then reverse the process to get the response back to the user.

This can be a standalone device, but it is very common to integrate VPN concentrator functionality within a next-generation firewall. Because of the encryption and decryption process required, purpose-built hardware is usually used to provide very high throughput and support hundreds or even thousands of users simultaneously.

However, if you have a smaller network, you may not need a purpose-built appliance. There are many VPN concentrators that run as software on an existing operating system. You may need to install specialized software to use a manufacturer's VPN, although Windows, MacOS, and Linux operating systems include built-in VPN software that can connect to many different types of VPNs.

---

## Quality of Service (QoS)

Not all applications are designed to run simultaneously on a network, and some applications may have a higher priority to your organization than others. For example, a real-time audio or video stream might have higher priority than a file transfer.

Because of these requirements, network administrators often provide prioritization for different applications. This is done through Quality of Service (QoS) configuration. You might also hear this called traffic shaping or packet shaping. This allows the administrator to control what types of applications can flow through their network, usually based on bandwidth usage or particular data rates. This might allow real-time applications to have full access to the network while putting lower priority on applications that are simply transferring files.

To control quality of service, you may need to make configuration changes inside a firewall, router, or switch. These devices might have a pre-built list of applications and might also allow you to add your own applications to the list. At that point, you can decide what priority those applications have relative to everything else running on the network.

---

## Time to Live (TTL)

One challenge with technology is that it is very good at performing tasks repeatedly. Unfortunately, this could also put a device into a state where it performs the same task over and over and never finds a way to complete or end that particular task.

For this reason, protocols often include functions to recognize when a task is taking too long and remove it from the network. One common way to provide this is through Time to Live, or TTL. A TTL is essentially a timer that may be based on the time of day or the number of iterations a particular task completes. Once that timer hits zero, the task stops or is dropped from the network.

There are many uses for TTL. One example is a packet that constantly loops between different routers. We might want that packet automatically dropped if the loop occurs a certain number of times.

Another good example is clearing a cache. When you access a website, it is stored in a cache that might only be available for 60 seconds or a few minutes. When the timer hits zero, the cache is cleared. The next time the website is accessed, the request must go all the way to the original site to bring back the information, which is then placed in the cache and another timer starts.

Another example of using TTL to stop looping traffic is through a routing loop. This can happen when Router A thinks the next hop is Router B, and Router B thinks the next hop is Router A. The packet goes back and forth between those routers over and over again.

If you performed a trace route, you would see this loop where the route goes to one IP address, then another, then back to the first, and so on. This continues until the TTL is reached. This does occur occasionally because routers have many different routes, and a single IP address mistake in a static route can create a routing loop.

For routing loops, we use a TTL field inside the IP packet itself. This allows us to identify and automatically stop a loop if one occurs. The Internet Protocol includes functions to detect this loop and stop it. In IP, the TTL refers to the number of hops a packet will go through. Each time a router processes a packet, it decreases the TTL by one. When that value reaches zero, the router discards the packet, effectively ending the loop.

The default TTL for MacOS and Linux is usually 64 hops, and the default for Windows is 128 hops. Since the router decreases the TTL by one each time the packet passes through, it monitors that number decreasing. When the TTL reaches zero, the router drops that packet.

In the IPv4 header, there is a Time to Live field. The router uses this to determine if the TTL has reached zero and if it should discard the packet from the network.

In most cases, the total number of hops between you and a destination on the internet is usually around 12 to 16 hops, sometimes more and sometimes less. This is a relatively small number when you consider that the default TTL on MacOS or Linux is 128 hops on Windows. This gives us 64 hops and plenty of room to get data from one side of the internet to the other without accidentally dropping packets.

---

## TTL in DNS

Depending on the protocol, TTL may have a different definition. With routers, TTL is associated with the number of hops. But in DNS (Domain Name System), TTL is associated with the total number of seconds.

Let us look at a DNS lookup scenario. You can perform this yourself using nslookup or dig to look up a website. Your DNS server will return an IP address associated with that web server.

Inside the DNS resolution is information about TTL. This tells us how long we should cache this entry on our system. The TTL is included with the configuration on a DNS server. When you run a dig command, you can see in the Answer Section that the DNS server provides a TTL value, such as 300.

This 300 value tells our local machine to keep this IP address in the cache for 300 seconds. If you do the math, that is five minutes. Once those five minutes have elapsed, the cache removes that resolution. If you want to know the IP address for that same server again, you would need to perform another DNS query to update your cache.

This allows an administrator to change the IP address in DNS configuration and feel relatively secure that most people will have an updated version within a few minutes.

TTL is used for many other protocols as well, so make sure you check the documentation for a particular protocol to understand exactly how TTL is measured for that specific protocol.
